SUPPLEMENT
TO THE FIRST VERSION

SOLANGE BLANCHARD SENDS
CHARLES BLANCHARD TO BEG AT
FUNERALS

The only thing that consoled her a little was the thought that she could, in the evening, make vegetable soup. They often gave her vegetables at the farms she visited. They gave her potatoes, they gave her cabbages, turnips, onions, leeks. She loved soup so much! Soup is warm, she ate it, it seemed to her that it gave her as warmth what she had lacked these two years. She emerged from her silence, she wanted her son to understand clearly what a soup is worth.

She said to him:

"Eat well. Soup is good, and it stays with you."

It seemed to her she had discovered within herself a delicious organ called the stomach which, when one has enough to satisfy it, is the seat of a great happiness. She felt at ease, the soup sustained her, the soup carried away her sorrow, she was no longer afraid of falling ill. She consented to sacrifices, she committed imprudences; as one needs butter to put in the soup, she bought butter.

Sometimes, however, in the very middle of her pleasure, a sudden silence would occur in her head, she did not at first know what was going to happen, then a sharp awareness would pierce through those heavy feelings that had made her surrender to well-being. A clearer conscience became her conscience. She knew at what price she had paid for this soup she was eating. She blushed as if she had appeared before an accuser. She did not know how to defend herself, she accepted all the reproaches, she received them, she gave them a place that the soup did not have. She thought:

"I am a glutton!"

It seemed to her she had sold her soul for a bowlful of soup. She was a beggar, she made no distinction between herself and those old men who live who knows where, who come out of prison, who make a profession of seeking their bread, who steal, who set fire to farms, who sleep in ditches. They could have said to her:

"I am your equal. You do the same thing as I."

Certainly, they received her well at the farms. The dogs barked but did not launch themselves at her, the women saw her coming, opened the door and shouted at the dog:

"Will you be quiet, filthy beast!"

They said to her:

"And me, my poor Solange, if I were to lose my husband what would I have to do? I have two children. I would have to seek my bread too."

These words did not console Solange, but on the contrary showed her that it would have taken a great misfortune for other women to arrive where she was.

And then, no matter how well they received her, she was not sure of herself. A caprice would have sufficed, a whim; it would have sufficed that once, not having thanked people with enough warmth, she had offended them, for those who do good like others to notice it. They would not have hesitated to tell her:

"I cannot give you anything. I need my bread for myself."

She was at the mercy of everyone; apart from beggars she was the equal of no one. There were on the Earth two sorts of inhabitants: those who earn their bread and can eat it with full mouths with no other care than that of being happy, and there was Solange Blanchard who, head bowed, approached them and waited to know whether, when they had eaten, there might not remain something they could share between their dogs and her.

She would not have suffered so much had she been alone in the world. She said to herself:

"If it were only me! Once I am dead, all this will no longer be known!" But she thought of the child who still had his whole life to fill. It would have been much wiser had she spoken to him of nothing, but sometimes, when the dark thoughts fell upon her head with the weight they have, she looked around her to see if someone could help her bear the burden. Her son was her only companion, and although he was but a child, he was there, she had no choice, she spoke to him:

"My Charles, what a sad destiny we have!"

He was a good little boy. He was beginning to become serious, he saw what his situation was, he shaped his life to the words his mother told him. He walked beside her, he matched his steps to those of his mother, she held herself a little bent when climbing the hills and he understood that one must hold oneself a little bent when climbing a hill. They went at an even pace; as the child's legs were smaller, he moved them more, they advanced on the same line in the same life, they carried the same thought, with only this difference: that the child being younger considered it a game whose rules he practiced with attention and without noticing the fatigue. He knew the paths, he knew that on such a road one goes to such a person, he took an interest in this, he was proud when he had guessed right.

"It is to mother Pernier's that we are going, maman."

When they came back, he still wanted to do as his mother did, and for a few minutes it was he who carried the basket.

Solange was pleased. She said:

"It is true that he gives me trouble, but from time to time he does me little services."

She ended by asking him to take her place. It happened several times, in rather important circumstances, that she sent him off in her name and entrusted him with what one might call a mission. She began the day they buried Monsieur Ducrot. Monsieur Ducrot, after a long illness, died as was expected. His funeral was to take place one morning at ten o'clock; he was a very rich man, and it was to be expected that upon leaving the cemetery his family, according to custom, would have some coins distributed to the poor. Solange could not attend the ceremony, being kept until noon by the housework at the home of Monsieur Lhotte, the clerk of the justice of the peace. She hesitated a little before going to ask at funerals, but upon reflection she realized that since she was already seeking her bread at the farms, she had no need to be proud.

She gave the child his instructions:

"You will go wait for the coffin in front of the house. When the procession sets off, you will place yourself behind everyone. You will enter the church, you will remain kneeling and you will pray well to the Good Lord. At the cemetery, you will see, there will be others like you; after the ceremony, you will all stay in front of the gate and the servant will give each of you something. If they ask your name, you will say that you are the little Blanchard."

They gave him a ten-sou piece. He was afraid of losing it, he did not want to put it in his pocket for fear that it might have a hole in it. He did not dare keep it in his hand, for fear it might slip between his fingers. He emerged at last from this difficulty and resolved the question by putting the coin in his hand, the hand in his pocket.

He walked very fast, he felt that joy of children who, just like grown persons, have made themselves useful. It seemed to him he had earned ten sous.

He went to many other funerals.

As soon as a rich man had died, a sort of atmospheric tremor, from village to village, announced the news. One would have thought a void had been produced somewhere, the air rushed toward it, a singular wind spread along the roads, raising the dust and coming to beat against the closed shutters of the house which, having lost its master, seemed as if it must belong to whoever would come to take it.

Men, women, children, the poor on the roads advanced in its direction. Distance, bad weather, heat, weakness, infirmities, nothing was an impediment for them. Some came with crutches, with stiff legs, some came limping. Children of two years had walked ten kilometers. Infants at the breast, heavy as stones, in the arms of the women cried from fatigue and fretfulness. Old men between two sticks, their heads trembling, consecrated what life remained to them to making an act of presence.

They attended all the ceremonies of death. They formed a single immobile and silent mass apart from the procession, they did not dare mingle with the crowd of the living: if they entered the church they stayed near the door and kept it open so as better to be able to flee. No one permitted himself a gesture, those who coughed felt guilty, when they walked they moved their legs gently and feared that their steps might make a great noise. The children were watched by all eyes. They did not even pray, they were there, they had come, they had made the journey, they presented a defenseless life and waited, with humility, for those who had the power to consult among themselves about what share of the dead man's goods would be distributed to them.

Most of the time they were not given much. They had a movement of ill humor. It was not worth a rich man dying for the poor to receive so little. They noticed then that the road was long which separated them from their home. They returned without courage. The only thing that made them bear the fatigue was sometimes, when they had stumbled a little too much against the stones, to open the hand and look there, in the hollow of their palm, at the silver coin which, despite everything, was worth their suffering the difficulties of the journey. They put it away upon arriving, each of them had his hiding place, they put it safe from thieves. They were sad the following days at the thought of what they had seen. Each of them was ashamed to have been with the others. They had mingled with all the beggary of the surroundings, they had walked side by side with people who had ruined themselves through bad conduct, they had rubbed shoulders with the verminous, they had been part of a crowd which included idiots, the infirm, the idle; some vagabonds without domicile, passing through the country, had come to join their group. There were there people to whom once they had given two sous, there were there people to whom they had never addressed a word because they wished to ignore even their existence. Some had been to prison.
