II / THE SMALL TOWN


The small town where Charles Blanchard lived was not one of those restless cities where factories, shops, and inns set men, women, and wagons circulating in throngs and generate an activity that frightens children a little. It was one of those market towns, such as one sees in the provinces of central France, which, surrounded by countryside as a house is surrounded by a garden, take pleasure in their comfortable situation and find time to breathe the good air. The streets were wide, the houses white, only the smoke from the domestic hearth rose into the blue; it could not trouble an immense and profound sky that occupied a great space and that, as the familiar expression has it, began where the rooftops ended.

The walks that Charles Blanchard took through his native town may be compared, as to their results, to those fine voyages in the course of which one learns that there exist other men, other seasons, other happinesses. The sun, like God, reigned in the very middle of the world, and from the height of his dwelling, bending his face toward the Earth, distributed to her in great floods his sentiments of joy. He was there. A tender light flowed over things which, motionless and full of pleasure, received it upon all their faces. It was morning.

One may say that the child encountered on his way all that one can see of gentleness in this world. The doors of the houses were open: the doors of this one, the doors of that one, the doors of yet another; each house made one think of a man who, emerging from a night of sleep, has need to look at what is happening outside. The housewives devoted the first hours of day to ridding the furniture of the dust the day before had left upon it: one glimpsed in each interior gleaming armoires, polished chairs, plump beds which, relieved of their burden of the night, beneath their curtains that had been lifted, seemed to breathe. They did not content themselves with having put good order in their homes: once their house was swept, they went out and swept the street. Everything was clean, everything was young, the entire small town made one think of a child whom its mother has just got out of bed and who, having made its toilette, prepares to pass a charming day.

Time walked with ease. One had heard nine o'clock strike from the church steeple, then, as one had gone to take a turn and had looked about a little: suddenly, one could hardly believe it, a new hour was striking, and it was ten o'clock. How easy life was! Men, in groups, planted themselves in the very middle of the street, and after having looked at one another for some minutes, after having pronounced a few words, by common accord, all at once, they began to laugh. Women, drawn by the noise, mingled with them. A little later, each went off to his work. In the wheelwright's shop and in the blacksmith's, robust men, their sleeves rolled up, accomplished admirable labours and made children wish they were fifteen years older so they could, like them, shoe the wheels, struggle against the horses, and vanquish the red-hot iron.

Noon arrived without effort. The afternoon, which began next, was a new day gentler than the morning. Hours all blue had invaded the street and enveloped the houses; the walker was in the midst of them, and like one who leads a life for which it seems he was born, the depths of his heart were joyful and without worry. Hours all blue and full of a great calm spread out beneath the sky: they were beautiful, one had pleasure in seeing them. Behind certain windows, young women seated and working at some piece of sewing sang in the peace a sentimental ballad that, enlarging one's soul, led one to believe in universal happiness. Behind the windows where there was no one, one found oneself imagining that a happy young woman had just stepped away, but that she would appear again very soon to take up her role and thus make each house full of songs.

Charles Blanchard did not know at that time of how many hours each day was composed: there were a great number of them, each one taken between the one that had preceded it and the one that was going to follow; a delicious procession crossed through time; when it had passed, it seemed one had heard a long canticle being sung. Every day was followed by a morrow. Before knowing it, the child already knew that it would resemble the day before, that it would possess like her a pure air, a warm sun, and that in the houses as in the streets, men, women, children, all those who are of this world would turn toward him a trusting face. Where is she, the disinherited creature who remembers having wept? Transparent days joined the Earth to the Sky, one drew ceaselessly nearer to a profound happiness into which, entering entirely, each one was going to enjoy eternal life.
